>> It's so important to keep
your brain functioning at its
very, very best, primarily
because there is no alternative.
There is no fallback plan.
We don't have anything
that will help
us take care of
this problem if we
don't act as our own
arbiters of brain health.
So many of our lifestyle
choices reflect on
whether the brain is
going to work well or not.
We are the arbiters of
our brains' destiny.
And that's a bit heady
because it hits the ball back
to our side of the
net for us to play.
We sort of live in a
world where we kind of
think we should offload
our destiny to the doctors
to take care of this
problem or that problem
once it has already arisen.
And the reality is that
we are setting the stage
throughout our lifetimes
for how our brains are going
to function later in life.
Let's talk then about the
biggest threats to brain health,
the biggest risks that are
unfortunately so commonly parts
of our lives these days.
And not in any
particular order, but I
would say that keeping your
blood sugar under control
is a big, important
goal for brain health.
Another not so often talked
about threat to brain health
is not getting enough
restorative sleep.
Who knew?
Not getting enough
restorative sleep
threatens the brain through
a number of mechanisms.
It is associated
with inflammation.
It's associated with
elevated uric acid.
increased risk of obesity.
And it is associated with
elevation of blood sugar
like we just talked about.
So I really think there
needs to be so much more
emphasis on people reigning in
what's going on with their sleep
these days.
If you want to be
productive, if you
want to have a highly
functioning brain, then
by all means, pay
attention to your sleep.
Pay attention to not
just the quantity,
but the quality of
your sleep as well.
People who exercise have a
dramatically reduced risk
of developing Alzheimer's
disease, a disease for which we
have no pharmaceutical
treatment.
Interestingly, in 2017 in one of
our best peer-reviewed neurology
journals was a fascinating
study that was a practice
guide for a neurologist.
And it asked a simple question,
what is the best treatment?
What is the best intervention
we can offer patients
who have developed mild
cognitive impairment, MCI,
harbinger for future
Alzheimer's disease?
You have a patient who has
been diagnosed with MCI,
you know they're going to
move on to Alzheimer's sooner
or later.
What should we do?
And it went through 14
different possibilities.
This drug, that drug, every
drug you can think of.
And they settled on only
one validated recommendation
from the neurology journal.
And it said the best thing you
can do for these patients is
tell them to exercise.
That was the drug.
So exercise is profound.
How does it work?
Exercise does two
things in the body.
There's a teeter totter between
the growth of new brain cells.
And on the other side, you may
have guessed it, inflammation.
Higher levels of inflammation,
less growth of new brain cells.
We want to do everything we
can to turn on new brain cell
formation in our brains.
And beyond that, we want to
turn on the way our brain
cells connect to each other.
That's how the brain works.
It's how we form memories.
We want to keep that going.
And that happens
under the influence
of a very important chemical
that goes by the initials BDNF.
For anyone who wants to know,
it's Brain-Derived Neurotrophic
Factor.
It's basically Miracle-Gro
for your brain cells.
How do you have more BDNF?
You exercise.
Dramatically increases BDNF.
You grow new brain
cells, especially
in the brain's memory center,
and you cause more connections
to form in your brain.
We've got to do everything we
can to give people the tools
to prevent this
godawful situation, not
just for the patients,
but for their families
and loved ones as well.
And this is six million
people in America
right now, with that number
predicted to triple by 2050.
One interesting study from
2017 published in the Journal
of Neurology looked at 6,583
individuals and measured
their sagittal
abdominal diameter.
What does that mean?
Well, that's a cat
scan measurement
of how big is your belly.
Followed these
people for 36 years.
And what did they find?
They found that those
individuals who had a bigger
belly 36 years ago had
a three-fold increased
risk of being demented when they
finally went back and followed
these people.
Think about that.
That means that we've
got to pay attention
to these important lifestyle
factors like our body weight,
like our blood pressure,
like our blood sugar,
like our uric acid levels
far in advance of suddenly
not being able to
remember the Wi-Fi code.
These are players that are
instructive for us in our 20s,
in our 30s.
That's the target
population that
needs to wake up and realize
that they are already
charting their brain destiny.
So we used to talk
about this thing called
age-related dementia,
as if that's just
what happens as you get older.
In fact, some people don't
call it Alzheimer's disease.
They call it old
timer's disease.
And I would submit
that you do not
have to accept the notion
that your brain function is
going to decline with age.
If you engage in the right
lifestyle activities,
making sure you're sleeping,
making sure you're exercising,
making sure that your diet is
designed to keep your blood
sugar in check,
you should expect
that your brain function is
going to be preserved well
into your older age.
Now, if you were to ask
me, what are the top tips
from a neurologist?
I'm going to give you it from
the perspective of a neurologist
and from a family member of
somebody dying of Alzheimer's
disease.
And it would be
number one, diet.
Number one, pay
attention to your diet.
Number two, exercise
is hugely valuable.
One year of exercise
has been demonstrated
to be associated with actually
an increased size of the brain's
memory center called the
hippocampus, as opposed
to a reduction in size in
people who simply stretched.
And the third thing
would be, hey, you
need to learn about the quality
and quantity of your sleep.
It means go and
get a sleep study
or much more conveniently,
buy a wearable device
and learn what's going on
in your body in your brain
at night when you think
you're sleeping well.
There's always the discussion
of the brain superfoods.
And for me, I would
say among my favorites
are fish or basically
fish oil for people who
are not wanting to eat fish.
And primarily what we're
talking about there is the DHA,
the omega three that
is found in fish oil.
And there's even
vegetarian-sourced DHA.
That is a powerful,
powerful brain tonic.
It turns on this BDNF
that tells the brain
to make more brain cells.
It leads to protecting
brain cells.
It helps to reduce inflammation
quite dramatically.
And it even helps how one
brain cell can communicate
to the next brain cell.
So anything that's giving
somebody DHA, I'm all in.
There's a lot of
research on olive oil.
As a matter of fact,
the PREDIMED study,
one very large
study out of Spain,
demonstrated that
consumption of olive oil
is associated directly with
reduced Alzheimer's risk.
More olive oil
consumption, lower risk
for Alzheimer's disease.
I like the berry idea, the
ideas of eating blueberries,
for example, because first,
they're low in sugar,
but they're good in
phytonutrients that help reduce
inflammation, can actually
help reduce uric acid,
and have a blood sugar
balancing effect as well.
We've talked about
walnuts in the past,
and no one really
has fully explained
why walnuts seem to be
so effective in terms
of being good for the brain.
It turns out that the
newer literature on walnuts
shows that walnuts actually
are associated with a pretty
dramatic drop in uric acid.
That's got to be
good for the brain.
Uric acid elevation, raises
blood sugar, blood pressure,
and certainly
threatens the brain.
Other foods that I think
are really important, not
necessarily foods, but spices.
For example, turmeric
has long been
one of my favorites because of
its powerful anti-inflammatory
activity.
But turmeric, like DHA, turns
on the production of BDNF,
the Miracle-Gro for the brain.
And turmeric also
activates a pathway
that dramatically increases
the body's own antioxidant
and detoxification pathways.
So it's really quite
handy in terms of the way
that it's able to do that.
Cinnamon is worthwhile because
cinnamon helps balance blood
sugar.
And similarly, garlic does
activate certain detoxification
pathways.
So that's certainly on the
list of herbs and spices
that we certainly recommend.
It looks like there is an
association, a pretty dramatic
association with respect to wine
consumption with lowered risk
of Alzheimer's, developing
Alzheimer's, but in a very
narrow range.
In other words,
one glass of wine
per day for women
and only up to two
glasses of wine per day in men.
Lower than that, higher risk.
Higher than that, higher risk.
We call this a U-shaped curve,
meaning there's a sweet spot,
meaning there's a
perfect amount--
not perfect-- but an
ideal amount of alcohol,
in this case, wine
specifically, consumption
that would be beneficial, we
would think, for the brain.
I think one of the
most valuable things
to consider if you're wanting
to engage some form of activity
that you think is
going to be good
for your brain is to get into
something that is two-handed.
Why?
Because that is a process
by which information
has to go from one
side to the other.
And there's a lot
of incorporation
of data that has to happen when
you're involved in fingering
the chords on your
left hand while you're
picking on the right
hand, playing the piano,
doing things that
involve two sides.
I think that diet is probably
the most important input
as it relates to charting
our brains' destiny.
There are obviously lots
of brain superfoods,
but I think in our
modern times, it's
more about what you
choose to avoid.
It's more about
recognizing what foods
are most threatening for
brain health and heart
health and endocrine health and
metabolic health, all the same.
There's no brain healthy diet
that's not good for your heart.
There's no brain
healthy diet that's
going to not necessarily
be good for your diabetes.
It's all the same.
How could it be otherwise?
So food is the biggest input.
And you cannot exercise
away a crappy diet.
I'm telling you, exercise
is fundamentally important,
but it's not on the
top of the list.
We do need to exercise.
We do need to pay attention to
all these parameters like sleep,
like exercise, like
limiting stress.
But diet is on the
top of the list.
But now we know that
seemingly disparate parts
of the body like the
gut and the brain
are actually intimately related.
We're just beginning to gain an
understanding as to how intimate
that relationship really is
to think that we can leverage
interventions related to the
gut to have an outcome that
can relate to mood.